Updates to the Room DAG concepts development document (#12179)
matrix-org/synapse: docs/development/room-dag-concepts.md

historical section of timeline (i.e. `/messages`), you want to see the best
representation of the state of the room as others were seeing it at the time.

## Outliers

We mark an event as an `outlier` when we haven't figured out the state for the
room at that point in the DAG yet. They are "floating" events that we haven't
yet correlated to the DAG.

> Outliers typically arise when we fetch the auth chain or state for a given
> event. When that happens, we just grab the events in the state/auth chain,
> without calculating the state at those events, or backfilling their
> `prev_events`.

Reviewer: This sentence makes less practical sense to me than the previous one:

> For example, when we fetch the event auth chain or state for a given event, we
mark all of those claimed auth events as outliers because we haven't done the
state calculation ourself.

Perhaps:

```suggestion
Outliers typically arise when we fetch the auth chain or state for a given
event. When that happens, we mark all of those claimed auth events as
outliers because we haven't done the state calculation ourself, or backfilled
their `prev_events`.
```

Author: I don't really understand what you're trying to get at with "we haven't done the state calculation **ourself**". There are other times where we don't calculate the state at an event and yet those events aren't outliers (eg: the join event when joining a room over federation).

Also: the fact that we haven't backfilled `prev_events` doesn't, in itself, make it an outlier.

Reviewer: I think the big differentiator phrase to me is "mark all of those claimed auth events as outliers". Without something like that, it's not clear to me what we do after "we just grab the events in the state/auth chain".

The other phrasing is just notes on what Synapse is doing. By "ourself", I mean the local homeserver doing the work that we trust as a user on that server. Vs other servers who already calculated the `auth_events` on the `outlier` since it has `auth_events` and is available over federation.

Author: well, I don't disagree that the wording could be clarified, but I'm still struggling to make improvements without saying things that are actually wrong. For example,

> mark all of those claimed auth events as outliers

isn't really true: we only do so for (claimed) auth events that we didn't already have.

How about just adding a sentence:

```suggestion
Outliers typically arise when we fetch the auth chain or state for a given
event. When that happens, we just grab the events in the state/auth chain,
without calculating the state at those events, or backfilling their
`prev_events`. Since we don't have the state at any events fetched in that
way, we mark them as outliers.
```

Reviewer: That's better 👍

For some reason "claimed" clarifies the point that they can't be trusted for me which would be nice to include.

> > mark all of those claimed auth events as outliers
> 
> isn't really true: we only do so for (claimed) auth events that we didn't already have.

I feel like your suggestion also doesn't clarify this point but I feel like it doesn't matter whether this is clarified anyway. It's a separate fact that we don't re-outlier a persisted normal event. And the paragraph below touches a bit on this point in a different way.

I'm not coming up without something better than the following but your suggestion is also a good improvement.

```suggestion
Outliers typically arise when we fetch the auth chain or state for a given
event. When that happens, we mark all of those claimed auth events that we
don't already have as outliers because we haven't done the state calculation
ourself, or backfilled their `prev_events`.
```

Reviewer: Updated in https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/12345 with your suggestion 👍

So, typically, we won't have the `prev_events` of an `outlier` in the database,
(though it's entirely possible that we *might* have them for some other

> reason). Other things that make outliers different from regular events:

Reviewer 2: Not saying we need to include them all here, but could you give a couple of examples for my own understanding? I imagine it is something like we have one, but we don't know the connection between the outlier and the previous events for some reason (maybe we previously left a room and were re-invited or something weird)?

Author: a couple of examples:
 * When you first join a room, you pull in the current state events in that room as outliers, which will normally include the first few events (`m.room.create`, `m.room.member`, `m.room.power_levels`, etc). Obviously, the `m.room.create` is the prev_event of the first `m.room.member`. So we have both in the database.
 * Suppose we received a chunk of timeline, and then went offline for a while. The first thing that happens to happen when we go offline is a state event (call it `S`), and then there's a load of other activity. Later, we come back online. We don't fill the entire gap in the DAG, but we do end up pulling in any state that changed - including `S` - as outliers. So `S` is an outlier, but it just so happens that we have its prev_events in the database.

I can stick this in the body of the doc if it would be helpful.

Reviewer 2: Thanks! I don't know if we really need the examples, as you mentioned in chat it might be taken as a list of the only ways it happens.

> reason). Other things that make outliers different from regular events:

Reviewer 2: Not saying we need to include them all here, but could you give a couple of examples for my own understanding? I imagine it is something like we have one, but we don't know the connection between the outlier and the previous events for some reason (maybe we previously left a room and were re-invited or something weird)?

 * We don't have state for them, so there should be no entry in
   `event_to_state_groups` for an outlier. (In practice this isn't always

>    the case, though I'm not sure why).

Reviewer 2: Is there a bug we should reference? Are they from an old bug that we don't think is happening anymore?

Author: I think it is still happening. Have opened an issue.

```suggestion
   the case, though I'm not sure why: see https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/12201).
```

>    the case, though I'm not sure why).

Reviewer 2: Is there a bug we should reference? Are they from an old bug that we don't think is happening anymore?

 * We don't record entries for them in the `event_edges`,
   `event_forward_extremeties` or `event_backward_extremities` tables.

Since outliers are not tied into the DAG, they do not normally form part of the
timeline sent down to clients via `/sync` or `/messages`; however there is an
exception:

### Out-of-band membership events

A special case of outlier events are some membership events for federated rooms
that we aren't full members of. For example:

>  * invites received over federation, before we join the room

Reviewer 2: If we have local users Alice and Bob; remote user Charlie. Charlie and Bob share a room. Charlie invites Alice to join them.

In this case, do we still end up with an outlier / out-of-band membership event? The homeserver will have the full auth chain, etc. from Bob so I don't think so?

Author: Good question!

I think the invite still follows the same codepath, even though we share a room. So yeah, it probably still ends up stored as an out-of-band-membership event. I don't really know, without trying it out.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the answer! I suspect it isn't important to figure out (it should do the right thing?), but figured I'd ask!

>  * invites received over federation, before we join the room

Reviewer 2: If we have local users Alice and Bob; remote user Charlie. Charlie and Bob share a room. Charlie invites Alice to join them.

In this case, do we still end up with an outlier / out-of-band membership event? The homeserver will have the full auth chain, etc. from Bob so I don't think so?

 * *rejections* for said invites
 * knock events for rooms that we would like to join but have not yet joined.

In all the above cases, we don't have the state for the room, which is why they
are treated as outliers. They are a bit special though, in that they are
proactively sent to clients via `/sync`.

## Forward extremity

Most-recent-in-time events in the DAG which are not referenced by any other
events' `prev_events` yet. (In this definition, outliers, rejected events, and
soft-failed events don't count.)

> The forward extremities of a room (or at least, a subset of them, if there are
> many) are used as the `prev_events` when the next event is sent.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this means the same thing, but I originally read this as "many" being a typo for "any".

```suggestion
The forward extremities of a room (or at least, a subset of them, if there are
more than one) are used as the `prev_events` when the next event is sent.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The forward extremities of a room (or at least, a subset of them, if there are
more than ten) are used as the `prev_events` when the next event is sent.
```

:innocent:

> The forward extremities of a room (or at least, a subset of them, if there are
> many) are used as the `prev_events` when the next event is sent.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this means the same thing, but I originally read this as "many" being a typo for "any".

```suggestion
The forward extremities of a room (or at least, a subset of them, if there are
more than one) are used as the `prev_events` when the next event is sent.
```
